I will, uh, just give him a minute to turn on his camera.
Here we go.
Ah, Perfect. Fantastic.
Welcome, uh, Simon and team from Waste Management.
Um, you guys are up for the next 10 minutes,
so I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to run.
Um, but you might like to leave some time
for questions. It's all yours.
Um, thank you very much, um, to the, uh, um,
so I'm Simon Pelkington.
I'm, um, legal counsel for Waste Management.
I'm pairing here today with David Howie,
who is the executive of General Manager of Waste Management.
And I'll hand over to David, um, in a second.
The submission from Waste Management,
which which you'll have is, is,
is quite a simple one really, but, but a very important one.
Um, waste Management su, you know, supports the, um, intent
of, of, of the bill and it, and, and it does.
So as New Zealand's largest, um, waste services
provider, um, with, with operations, you know,
right across the country, which, which are essential, um,
are essential infrastructure.
And, and, and essentially the, the submission, um,
really is that that waste management needs
to be included in schedule three of the bill.
Uh, it needs to be included so that it can be involved in,
um, all of the, the, the planning, um, et cetera,
that it's done, uh, in anticipation of,
of these events rather than, um, rather than be left out
and, and, and have to do its own thing, um,
on an ad hoc basis, uh, when, when they occur.
Um, we are not, and,
and we have looked, we are not really aware
of the policy basis for the ex exclusion of waste services,
um, as an essential infrastructure provider,
not just from this legislation, but from other legislation.
We, we, we just don't understand the,
the policy basis for it.
There doesn't seem to be any, any basis for it.
And so that is, that is the essential submission, um, from,
from Waste Management to be included rather than have to go
through the, um, order
and council process, which will seem to be inevitable,
um, really anyway.
Uh, and so I'll hand over to, to Mr.
Howie now, who, who, who, who,
who can explain from Waste Management's perspective why, um,
they think it, it, it is really critical to,
um, to be included.
Thank you, Simon. And, uh, good morning,
uh, to committee members.
Uh, I think just to reiterate that we, uh,
from a waste management perspective, uh,
certainly support the, uh, the tender of the bill.
And we've seen firsthand, uh, through a number of,
uh, major events, uh, over the last, uh, 10 to 15 years,
the importance
and critical nature of being able to provide continuity and,
and waste services, both the, the collection
of materials from households and businesses
and the safe, uh, consolidation and,
and ultimately disposal of that material, um,
in times when there are, uh, major failings in,
uh, other infrastructure, uh, as a result of those events.
So I think my, my experience with Waste Management, uh,
is in an executive role, uh, is, uh, has been for the last,
uh, 12 years, um,
and prior to that in the broader resource recovery sector,
um, for, uh, sort of 20 years prior to that.
So I've seen, uh, a number of events, uh, sort of,
that have had a major impact on the country, uh,
both nationally and at a regional level.
Um, and to just talk briefly about some of those, um,
if I go back to the Christchurch earthquake, um,
and the, uh, the events following that, uh, we
as an organization, we are able to
mobilize collection services to households,
uh, the following day.
So the next morning, uh, we were able to get out, um,
as you'd be aware, a complete failure of the, uh,
wastewater services
and, uh, much of the roading network, uh, made
that very challenging for, uh, for residents.
And, uh, for a lot of people, the only place they had
to dispose of any materials was in their, uh,
household wheelie bin.
Um, and, uh, to be able to safely
and san, you know, sanitary collect that, uh, is,
uh, was a, was a critical part of keeping,
I guess public health and the city safe following
that event, uh,
and gave people, I think, confidence that,
that some services were at least able to be up
and running, um, at a regional, uh, regional level.
Uh, cyclone Gabriel, more recently in the Hawke's Bay, uh,
the, the flooding
and the damage that was caused there saw the local, uh,
transfer station network for consolidation, uh,
either underwater or inaccessible.
And the local, uh, landfill for Hawke's Bay, uh,
was cut off with roading access and,
and damage to the site itself, which meant it was, uh,
inaccessible Waste Management was able in conjunction
with the local councils
and the, um, uh, other operators in the sector
to establish a interim transfer station at one of our sites.
Uh, and consolidate material both from residential and,
and probably more importantly from a number
of the commercial industrial providers
that had had major freezer failures, um,
and, uh, had a lot of cut traceable materials
that were gonna create major health issues if they weren't,
uh, safely disposed of, uh, and take that material away.
That the issue without being included in Schedule three
under this legislation is that, that we would continue
as we were in the Cyclone Gabriel example, to have
to operate effectively outside of a consenting requirement,
uh, to operate a site such as that.
Um, so we just think we have business continuity planning.
We have a, a lot of work as, as an organization that we do
to be able to provide immediate services,
but to be able to integrate that
with the emergency management teams, uh, across all
of the other providers
and be part of that from day one, uh,
would we believe create a much better outcome for, uh,
for communities and
for the country in those emergency situations.
Um, COVID-19 obviously was a, was another example where, uh,
the waste service was pulled in as a, as a, um,
critical infrastructure provider later,
but on a temporary basis.
And again, uh, just being
included in Schedule three would say as part of
that on an ongoing basis.
So that's, yeah, I guess any,
any questions probably is a good thing now.
Yeah. We've got a question from Lamon, Lydia s
Uh, thanks for your presentation.
Uh, I just have a question just with regards
to the criticalness of public health.
So as an, as an operator and,
and being left out is one thing,
and so there's, uh, you raise a very valid point
that the committee can discuss further,
but in terms of actually keeping the wheels moving in terms
of a recovery process,
because we saw, uh, in, in terms of, uh, different parts
that disposal safely of rubbish is really important
and people don't, are not fully aware people on the ground.
So can you just explain a little bit further in terms
of the criticalness of keeping the public health factors
going in and after event?
Sure. So, um, I think the,
the Christchurch earthquake was a, was a really good example
of that where, uh, where with wastewater services failing,
uh, or failed, um, and,
and to a certain extent in, in Hawke's Bay
after cycling Gabriel, um, households, uh,
didn't have access to, uh, toilet facilities, for example,
and they needed to dispose of that waste somewhere.
Um, a lot of it found its way into oily bins, um, and uh,
and we were able to collect that, um,
and dispose of it, um, at a, at an appropriate facility
that was able to cope with that material.
Um, whereas, uh, um, yeah, so I,
I think it's just being able to pick up those things,
understand that the profile
of the waste might be a little bit different to, to normal.
That, that, that people need to have the ability to dispose
of materials safely.
Um, and then to have the equipment available
that can firstly collect that, but then get it to a site.
Um, so a class one landfill that's got all
of the appropriate environmental protections to be able
to deal with that material safely, um,
and get it away from, um, areas
where it could impact public health.
Thank you. And, uh, we've just
probably got half a minute to squeeze in.
Andy Foster for one question.
Uh, look, thank you and thanks for the work you do.
Just very quick, um, question the, the difference between
what you have to do now
and what you would like to be able to do if you are a, um,
a schedule three, uh, critical service, um,
what difference does that make in terms of the ability
to be able to get on and do the job and,
and pick up these, um, uh,
these hazard health hazardous wastes? Yeah,
So I think I, I think the key difference
that we would see is, is being part of the planning
and preparation prior to an event so
that it can be mobilized more quickly
and that the opportunity to be able to, uh,
provide additional services, uh,
that we perhaps can't provide without a,
a time lag when they, uh, when, when an event occurs is
what we would see as being the, I guess the, the key areas.
So it's being involved in the planning, being able
to build those plans across different agencies and providers
and have that, uh,
I guess immediate response continuity available.
So you would then get, I meet the immediate ability
to be able to actually go out and do what you think you need
to do in that situation.
That's right, yes. Yeah. Okay, cool. Thanks.
Thank you. I really appreciate the submission
and, uh, really helpful, um,
to understand that piece around lifeline.
So, um, thank you for your time.
We are gonna move on to our next one.
I believe Diane is online. Um, you can unmute yourself.
Um, and, uh,
there will be five minutes for this submission.
And I'm also, just before you start, um, Limon
and Lydia, Nia is gonna take over the chair,
so she'll let you know when our time is almost up.
Okay, thanks. Yeah. Um, hopefully have time for questions.
Um, so the main points
of my feedback are practical ones in the hopes
that the government will encourage
and help people to prepare themselves for emergencies as,
uh, I listed my written submission,
but not limited to that list.
So when the Alpine fault goes
and it will rupture, all the planning
and flow charts of power
and responsibility will be good for starting a fire.
And nothing more power will be out for most people
for weeks, months, and for some possibly years.
The whole south island will look like Christchurch did on
February 22nd, 2011.
Some people on the flow chart will have perished.
The A FA may have triggered the ang subduction zone
to rupture and trigger volcanic eruptions and so on.
So Wellington and much
of the north island could be suffering
and will all be in the dark without means
of communication if radio links
or satellite comms aren't in place.
This is the worst case scenario, but still a possibility.
And planning needs to be for the worst, not
for the best possibility.
Therefore, local level planning, chain of command
and stockpile of supplies, food, medical hand tools,
et cetera, is imperative.
I'm not trying to fear monger,
I'm just trying to be realistic here.
The more people are prepared mentally, physically,
emotionally, the more resilient they'll be.
People who are trapped in their homes to do not be able
to open their windows is a real concern
and needs to be addressed.
No one I've spoken to wants to take responsibility for this.
I've been told if the windows open fully,
a child may fall out and hurt.
But hey, how did my generation survive
without all this health and safety over the top crap?
Sorry. You may not think it is part of this bill,
but if people die because they're trapped inside their homes
or it makes it very difficult to rescue them from fire,
flood, or earthquake because they can't get out,
then it is part of this.
Bill. Another point about risk consultation.
Nhu is a very successful multi-billion dollar corporation
with a sizable real estate portfolio.
Therefore, consulting with Nhu about areas
of risk is a huge conflict of interest in my opinion.
They may say that the management of their assets, such
as the massive dairy farm by the river, is done
through a third party, and
therefore not a conflict of interest.
But you don't become so successful by not knowing the ins
and outs of your own business involvements.
And something else I didn't mention in my written submission
is that insurance companies are beginning to dictate
where people can live by demon, an area too risky.
So Ralston, which is the fastest growing area in all
of New Zealand, um, the insurance companies have stated
that earthquake risk is too high
and will no longer give insurance to new builds there.
Well, Ralston wasn't affected by the earthquakes we had,
Christchurch was,
but insurance companies will still ensure new builds here,
even though we have slips, local drainage issues, flooding
as well as earthquakes.
When that was in civil defense, we were told
that if the Y Mack River broke its banks, all
of Christchurch would be affected.
And that Christchurch should have been built at Ralston.
Therefore, you can consult all the geologists,
all the community groups, farmers,
and all the iwi about risk.
But it's the insurance companies that will determine
where people live and their judgment may be based on
the stars more than actual risk to life and property.
So I just wanna end with a couple in New Brighten,
which is on the east coast of Christchurch.
We had a, a community meeting there
and we were talking about risk
and a Japanese Kiwi couple said they looked all
around the world where, you know,
with all the different risks involved where to live,
they ended up in New brighten.
'cause they said, we choose tsunami.
So I think people should have a right
to choose where they live.
So that's it.
Thank you Diane. Um, we've probably got enough time
for a very quick question as any of our panel members, um,
but we are out of time,
but I really thank you for your submission today.
Okay, well, just a practical founder's viewpoint,
thank you very much for
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, our next submitter is
PGO Power Co.
Uh, we have Carl and Mark
and Irene, uh, I believe they're with us.
Yep, we've got Carl.
Correct. Good morning everyone.
We're just waiting for the others to attend.
It's clicking through the, um,
Okay. Okay. You've
got 10 minutes, so over to you. Thank you.
Carl, did you wanna start?
Yeah, I was just, I was gonna say, I was just waiting
for my other colleagues to come on. I dunno if
You can Gemma, you can hear Gem.
Yes,
I'm Gemma Gearing.
I'm an executive manager at Powerco.
I'm joined today by Mark Dunn, who's our head
of network operations, re Clark, who's our policy manager,
and Carl, who you've just seen Carl
Woolworth, who's our head of risk.
Um, by way of brief background, Powerco owns the electricity
and gas infrastructure that connects over 1 million Kiwis
across the north island.
We have critical responsibilities as a lifeline utility,
and we operate across 29 different districts
and six regions.
We're also in the process of acquiring the first light
electricity network, which covers the gisborne and areas.
We're acutely aware of the impacts
and costs of emergency events,
and in these events we see the variation
and approaches across different regions.
Carl's gonna speak briefly to some examples and planning
and response, and then we'll leave time
for your questions. Thank you, Carl.
Okay, great. Thanks Gemma.
And again, good morning everybody.
Um, I guess there's two things really I'll talk to.
Um, so firstly, in terms
of planning and information sharing.
So in addition to our responsibilities, a
as a lifeline utility,
we voluntarily undertake climate related disclosures.
Um, we publish those through our integrated report
that's available on our website.
Um, and it's actually something that we don't have to do,
but we choose to do it.
Um, what that has done is helped us actually form, um,
climate adaptation and resilience plans for this.
What we do is we've assessed climate risks
and our asset vulnerabilities across our network,
and we've documented those risks and investment priorities.
We then share this data on our assets and hazards.
Um, and our plans going forward is to actually move
to a more open platform on our network, similar to
what we've currently got at the moment
with our online capacity maps.
We feel the bill could actually help in directing better
sharing of data so
that we can share this information two ways, particularly
with those who we need to coordinate with, um, such
as other infrastructure owners across the country.
Now, in terms of, I guess a real example for you, um,
following Cyclone Gabrielle,
a significant gas pipeline on our network, um,
was impacted on a bridge crossing in Napier.
Now that needed maintenance.
Um, in terms of the fixings, it was damaged by, um,
forestry slash coming down in the flooding.
The root of that pipeline was also across a road which also
needed reinstatement work,
but we were enabled to coordinate with the roading authority
to undertake that work in a coordinated manner.
Um, because we didn't have the right information,
particularly around the works that
that infrastructure provider was using,
the priorities and the sequencing.
In terms of the restoration activities, we think
that the regional plans could useful document, um,
how those interactions should work and the sequencing
and sharing of regional, um, lifeline utility data.
However, national direction is needed
to overcome some technical and organizational barriers.
There's real opportunity we feel in terms of
that significant step up of information sharing
through the right direction in the bill.
And we've made some, um, recommendations in our submission,
particularly on clauses 24 91 and 212.
So that's the first point. The second one really is
around emergency response.
The storm, less than two weeks ago, saw 26,000 properties.
Hard to believe that number without power on our network
across, um, WUI, Rani, Manawa two, and the wire wrapper.
In a period of one week, a team
of more than 250 field staff attended close to 1700 jobs,
including more than 500 lines down.
So yeah, incredible statistics.
Interesting cycle in Gabrielle was around 1800 jobs.
So you can see the scale of the work that was required.
Um, communication with civil defense, um, councils
and other life and organizations was critical in terms of
how we prioritize the restoration.
So a great example would be there was an isolated community
with medically dependent people,
and we prioritized the restoration of power there thanks
to communications with civil
defense and that local knowledge.
That being said, um, in situations,
or sorry, in some such a cycle, and Gabrielle
and other recent ones, the event, um, saw often multiple
and duplicated and possibly even unjustified information
requests that take our staff away from actually focusing on
restoring the energy.
One example, um,
we received an information request from a national agency
that requested updates, um, on restoration
and also any information around customer welfare concerns.
Now that information had already been
provided through the regional emergency response groups,
and also we have our map on our website, which is,
um, regularly updated.
So that information was there.
The request actually required quite a lot of manual efforts,
um, on our behalf,
and took a member of the team more than three hours
to respond to, um, which obviously prevented
that member from working on the restoration efforts.
And we actually didn't have any confidence
that the information once it was provided was even used
or actually was even required.
So again, our submission recommends that, um,
there are amendments to adjust the roles, clarity of leads,
and to avoid, um, the potential duplication.
I just mentioned, again,
recommendations on clause is a hundred twenty four fifteen
and 212.
So look, those were two, um, I guess key points
that we wanted to raise with you.
If I kind of draw that to a, I guess a summary, you know,
coordination is a specific purpose of the bill
and we hope that the committee will take the opportunity,
um, to make these improvements
to our emergency management system.
So I will pause there
and we welcome any questions that you may have.
Uh, thank you Carl, and to your colleagues, um, members,
are there any questions, Andy, over to you.
Thank you. Um, and as a Powerco customer,
I can say I'm very familiar with outages.
We had a few of those. Um, just in terms of your, um,
your transparency, um, you know, from a custom point
of view, sometimes the transparency between your trade off,
uh, between actually continually, um, doing work
to fix a problem and uh,
and actually doing any capital work to, um,
avoid the problem in the first place, um, is absolutely,
well, I'm not aware it's transparent.
Um, can you just sort
of give us some highlights on that too?
My, my question really is that transparency,
but also your responsibility is to, um, to have a, uh,
a reasonably robust network in the first place so
that you actually have less outages, um, when, um,
a storm event for example, occurs.
Uh, yeah, I'm happy to take that one.
So we, you may be aware
that we are price quality regulated by the commerce company.
So we do publish annually in asset management plan,
which outlines the capital work that we tend
to undertake every year
and the maintenance work that we have planned.
Obviously when there's big storm events, um, we have
to switch modes and it's not safe for us
to carry on doing planned work and we divert resources.
Um, we are, we operate under a revenue cap.
So the money that we spend repairing
after storms is money that it comes off
what we can spend on other work.
Um, so there is a bit of a juggling act.
Um, we do have, we are, we are measured, um, for
how many outages we have and long, how long they go for.
Um, and there are, you'll probably be aware
of penalties for breaching that.
Um, however, we've found over the last few years, some
of these massive weather events, there's nothing we could do
to make our network stand up to those, particularly when we,
um, you might be aware that there's consultation going on
around changing the tree regulations.
Yes, on the biggest problems we have is when a, when a,
you know, sort of massive tree comes down across our power
lines, there's, there's nothing we can do
to make them stand up to that.
And it's all about the response. So it is a juggling act.
I get that. Um,
and if you, if you want to read our asset management plan,
um, that's published every year, it should.
So it's a great read. I can tell you that we try to give
that transparency through that.
But, um, we're also doing a lot more on our, um,
website trying to push out to the, uh,
customers the work we're doing in each area
so they can understand our investment plans.
Dunno if you've have anything else to add, I shall
Read, I shall read that with interest
and possibly come back to you at some later stage.
Very Good. Yeah.
Hey, Jim, I, I could probably add as well that, um,
I think one of the points I talked to very quickly was
around, um, the climate adaptation. So we a lot,
You probably got about 20 seconds
because we've gotta go into the next submission.
But quickly, if you
Can talk, I was gonna say reference them just in terms
of we've done a lot of work around the vulnerability
of our assets and how
that filters into our asset management plan.
And we're working with local, um,
pilots across the lifeline groups to actually see
how we can sequence that work better.
Well, thank you very much, team for coming along.
It was really interesting to hear you.
Thank you for your submission. Thanks.
Great, thank you. Have a good day.
Our next submission is we welcome,
uh, RA
and Marie over to you.
Uh, there's five minutes for your submission. Thank you.
Well done.
Natural Resources manager.
And um, over here is my colleague Marie Langdon,
our development manager.
I just thought I'd just quickly speak to our, um,
submissions, which I'm sure you've already had the
opportunity to read.
Um, so I didn't want to take too much time,
but what I wanted to do was pass you over to our, um,
to Marie to actually speak about the work
that she does on a daily basis without any funding.
Um, ad hoc funding, ad hoc grants, um, running on the,
the smell of an oily rag
and the things that she's been able
to achieve in the last two years.
Behind us is our, so we cover from nui to,
so from UA
and KAHU in Northland down to, um, in ko.
So the crux of our submissions is really to try to, um, see
what we do reflected in the,
in the reform in the legislation,
but to the extent that we are able to really plan
for it on a yearly basis so that, um, when Marie goes
through with you what she, um, has been doing, um,
imagine the things that we could do if we were actually
seen in the reforms.
Um, and we were really able to plan.
So most of the submissions were submitted on the,
in the last two years have been in opposition
of most of the amendments.
But I must say that this one is a really positive shift
and we, um, really do, um, support the changes.
We support it. Uh,
and of course you'd see in the submissions that, uh, we,
we want more than just engagement.
We want to have shared authority and we want to partner,
and especially in terms of the responsibilities
and obligations we have to maki, um, our people, um, in,
we would love a seat at the table.
You know, I understand that there are already provisions in
the CDM groups and the CEG groups,
however, we are not part of TE anymore.
So TE is trying to really, um,
and so to have direct relationships with, with the Crown
and, and ministers.
So, um, we would like to have a, a formalized,
um, seat at the table.
Um, so we're, we're seeking a number of things in terms
of the submissions around, you know,
representation on welfare coordination groups,
Northern Lifeline groups, um, and things of that nature
because of what we've seen here with Cyclone Gabriel
and the recent, um, weather events, um,
and formalizing roles, uh, prior to, similar to some
of your submitters that you've heard from this morning, um,
formalizing some roles prior to the emergency so
that we are really able to be able to be better,
better equipped and better to able to, uh, better able
to assist the first responders.
And we would love for some capability
and capacity to support, um, the work that Marie does and,
and within our wider hapu of course, and our marai, um,
and, um, training, you know, allowing us to come along
to the training that, um, first responders have.
And this is happening. We do have in two weeks
time, sims training.
Um, so that's really good.
Um, climate and risk reduction support with that, um,
and support with MARAI as emergency hub.
So a lot of the, uh, the key themes of it is just, uh,
a little bit more formalized support
and a little bit more recognition, um,
and opportunity for us to sit in those different spaces so
that we are able to prepare.
And then one final thing,
and I know that this doesn't sit within any formalized, um,
legislation as we speak,
but we are current, we've currently taken it upon ourselves
to, um, start to develop
and implement a, um, UA iwi
wide emergency management plan, stepped in, um,
tell Maori we have buy-in from all of our PSGE.
So,
so, um, we are moving through, um, what
that framework looks like.
Um, and then moving through to how we can have a unified
coordination, unified communication, um, streams
to really assist those first responders.
So I'll hand it over to Marie. Thank you.
Oh, sorry to, um, apologize.
We're, um, you've probably got just about 30
seconds 'cause we need to go.
Oh, okay. I'll be real quick.
I can speak talk. So, so I managed the unit,
which was set up after Cycl and Gabriel.
Um, so it's a unit that's dedicated to, uh, risk reduction
and readiness first, first, first and foremost.
So we've done a lot of work in the, since Cycl and Gabriel.
Um, lots of education training, first aid,
um, resourcing our marae.
We've upgrading, um, drinking water.
We've done flood, um, protection, bund drainage.
We've rebuilt, um, our nui so
that they can receive the people we've upgraded our, so
that they can receive their communities.
We've, um, put on new elution blocks, um,
we've done maintenance and maintenance programs.
We've got a RAI team that's out there, um, helping our
and queer, um, we've resourced our warehouse here
that's got all the generators and all the equipment.
We've done that on the smell of it, oily rag.
So I guess it would just be nice to know that, you know,
we've shown that we're good partners
and that the, you know, we can get some resourcing
to help us to continue to do this.
Mahi ana are ready to, you know, when, when,
when it all got turns to custard basically. Well,
Thank, thank you very much, uh, appreciate it.
And we're out of time. Thank you for your submission.
Thank you. You Thank you.
Uh, we now welcome Companions, animals New Zealand.
You have 10 minutes for your submission
and we have, I don't have a name.
Is that, um, yourselves? Mc Yeah.
Hello, I introduce myself.
I'm I'm, I'm the CEO of Companion Animals New Zealand.
Um, hi Andy, how are you? And um, Hey Pete. Nice see you.
Uh, it's a pleasure to be here to, um, just to run
through a, a quick summary of, um, of our
view on, uh, on the bill.
Um, I'll hand over to my colleague, um, Dr.
Nicola McDonald now to run through those things
and be available for a few questions at the end.
Alright, good morning.
Um, I'm gonna share a presentation, uh,
to support our submission.
Go ahead.
Um,
okay.
Um, I see that
hopefully that's she correctly.
Can someone confirm that that's she correctly? So
Yeah, be good Nick.
Yeah. Alright. Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
On behalf of companion Animals from Zealand today, uh,
we'd first like to say that we, um, acknowledge
and appreciate the progress made in the emergency management
bill with the recognition of animals.
But there are still some critical gaps that we would like
to point out that may limit effective
emergency response in practice.
Our goal is to make sure the bill aligns with
existing animal welfare station
and recognizes that people, animals,
and environment are interconnected, which we refer to
as a one welfare approach.
Companion Animals New Zealand is a national
animal welfare charity.
We manage the New Zealand Companion Animal Register,
which holds more than 1.5 million animal records connected
to microchip numbers and has over 800,000 guardian
because we have more than a thousand approved users
who can access our register.
And these include veterinary clinics, shelters,
and animal control offices nationwide.
And we run educational initiatives
for animal guardians in New Zealand.
And we're also a member of the NPI facilitated National
Animal Welfare Emergency Management Sub-Function group.
Our central message is that animal welfare
and human safety are not separate issues in emergencies.
They are closely linked.
Almost two thirds of New Zealand households have a pet,
and these pets are considered family members
by most guardians and provide significant emotional
and social support in emergency context.
This bond directly influences human behavior,
decision making and recovery Planning for animals is
therefore not an optional extra, it's part
of effective emergency management.
There's strong evidence that people will risk their lives
for animals during disasters,
and of course, to leave the animals behind,
they will take longer to recover from
emergencies due to stress.
And as an example, we witnessed very distressed forced out
owners during cyclone Gabrielle trying desperately to locate
or identify their animals.
We also know that people delay reparation if animals cannot
come with them or some really into restricted
areas to retrieve them.
This has direct implications for public safety,
responder safety, animal welfare and recovery outcomes.
On the other hand, the families remain together
and with the animals, uh, recovery and resilience
and births,
while animals are referenced in the bill, we feel
that some operational gaps remain animals are classified
as property and they know this reflects legislation
elsewhere, but would like it modified in this bill.
The management of animals, um,
in Clause 91 specifically is a bit vague.
There are no clear powers to seize transport
and shelter animals.
There are no, um, identification provisions
for unidentified animals during the response.
And there's currently no reimbursement framework
for organizations that provide animal response capacity.
We're proposing targeted amendments that are practical
and proportionate.
Recognize animal sentient,
remove animals from property definition within the spill,
include animals in the emergency definition,
strengthen welfare standards and plans, set clear rescue
and care powers, including temporary holding facilities
for animals and allow systems for identifications
through microchipping
and registration on the New Zealand Companion Animal
Register and reimbursement provisions for charities
and big clinics that are part of the volunteer response.
New Zealand legislation already recognizes animals
as sentient beings under the Animal Welfare Act.
With the amendment from 2015, sentient means
that animals are able to experience the world subjectively
have emulsions and experience pain and pleasure.
We recommend that emergency management legislation reflect
that same principle.
This is not about elevating animals above people.
Human safety must always come first.
But we're asking for consistency across the legacy
of the framework.
We're asking that responders are given clear powers
to actively cease transport, shelter,
and provide care for animals wherever possible without
having to make contact with the owner First.
Animals and emergencies may be tracked in buildings injured
without food or water, or exposed to hazardous conditions.
We're also asking for clarity
around responsibility once those animals are in fear.
Research and operational experience shows
that separation from companion animals can have significant
psychological impacts on people and may slow recovery.
In contrast, rapid reunification reduces distress,
improves evacuation compliance,
and reduces pressure on temporary shelters.
We recommend enabling authorized tran personnel to microchip
and register unidentified animals found
during emergencies on the New Zealand
Companion Animal Register.
As this is a simple and effective tool
to support reunification,
there are also substantial costs associated
with sheltering animals that are not reunited
and remain long-term in shelter environments.
While prevention is the best preparation for these events
when it comes to animal identification practices,
there's still valid benefits in enacting a response when a
disaster hits animal emergency response in New Zealand
relies heavily on charities and veterinary teams.
These organizations provide essential services
during disasters, often at their own cost,
and when they themselves have been
affected by the emergency.
And the current model is not sustainable in prolonged
or large scale events.
We're recommending that reimbursement provisions be expanded
to include pre-approved animal welfare organizations
and veterinary clinics operating on the formal emergency
activation with appropriate accountability
and reporting for the event.
So in summary, we're asking for targeted amendments
to align the bill with existing animal welfare
and recognize animals as sentient beings
to clarify responder authority, support, identification,
and reunification, and enable sustainable response capacity.
Thank you so much, and we're now happy
to answer some questions.
Great. We're down to our last minute,
Andy, foster your question.
Yeah, look, thanks. Um, thanks for that.
Um, Nick and Pete, um, just quick question, just the, the,
the, the kind of people, organizations, et cetera,
who you would see being, um, able to be, um, allowed to, to,
to make those interventions that you're asking for
because obviously you don't,
I presuming you don't want anybody to be able to go
and do that, but you want some, the right
kind of people to be able to do that.
Yeah. Do you wanna say that one, Nick?
So it would be community response usually.
So the, uh, local shelters, um, are, are some
that we definitely consider on this.
And then the, uh, local, uh, veterinary practices as well.
And then, uh, welfare organizations
and New Zealand that support
and then emergency response as well.
So, so a, um, a controller or, or someone
or a preexisting arrangement in any given part
of the country that says that, uh,
certain organizations have the,
or people have the authority to be able
to go and intervene if need be. And so they allow
Yeah, we, we do, you know, we'd we expect to be a register
of those parties who are already doing this kind of thing,
not in an emergency who can be those,
those parties if that happens.
Right. Thank you. Thank you both for your submission,
uh, that you've presented this morning.
Thank you. Thank you very
Much for having us. Thank
you. We'd like to,
well now welcome the civil contractors New Zealand.
Welcome to Alan Pollard,
Madam Chair. Thanks very
much. Yeah, thank you for having us.
I'm Simon Alan Pollard. I'm Chief executive.
So we're contractors. My colleague Fraser Ma is our
communications advocacy manager.
Uh, I don't wanna go over our submission,
obviously for five minutes.
You've had a chance to read it.
I just wanna make a couple of points.
The submission is very heavily informed
by our own experiences of ourselves
and our members across various
weather events across the country.
Uh, I'm based in Hawke's Bay.
I experienced, uh, cyclone Gabriel as soon
as cyclone struck.
Um, we were able to compile a comprehensive list
or inventory of contractors
and equipment, really enabled to engage, uh,
to help save lives and save property.
Uh, I turned up to the emergency management office on day
two and was told they don't need us help and go away.
They don't need our help. Um,
very clearly there is something fundamentally wrong
with understanding what's needed
and required as soon as an emergency hits.
And our viewers early engagement with civil contractors
and particularly would've actually enabled a far better,
quicker response, save property far quicker and,
and save lives and so on.
I contrast that with, uh, the, the state highway network.
As soon as the cyclone at NZTA set up a governance group
that included ourselves
and that governance group, we had, uh, planning
and oversight responsibility.
And again, with the community,
we had an operational group reporting to us.
We had state Highway five open within five weeks,
despite 38, uh, slips
and bridge outages in there worked out already brilliantly.
The reality is though, madam Chair, that our,
our contractors are first responders.
They will, regardless of what the law says, they will go
and save lives and they will save property.
And the challenge with that is
that they expose themselves to legal liabilities.
So the second part
of our submission is some form of protection.
Now, a number of our contractors, when they went out
to either save infrastructure
or save people were then threatened with legal prosecution
by local authorities
because they didn't have the right consent
or they didn't, um, deposit, um, debris in the right place.
Which of course makes a nonsense
of saving people and saving lives.
So our second part of the submission is why we are
acting in good faith.
Our contractors should be protected from that.
I'll just invite my colleague
to say a couple of words and then yeah,
I'm aware we've got like three minutes left.
So just wanted to say, look, I mean, contractors are there.
When an emergency strikes, if you've got an earthquake,
you've got a fire or a flood,
there's always a digger in the background.
There's always someone moving earth
and, um, working to save people.
I mean, just to add a bit of, um, personal flavor to
what Alan said, look, I called our
members following site claim.
Gabrielle asked one of them, how are you?
He said, well, I've lost my transporter.
I've lost my 13 tonner,
but I saved 16 people's lives in the process, so I'm stoked.
So that's the moral obligation. There's two things.
There's the, the, the legality and the contract structures
and things like that, but there's also the moral obligation
to save lives and property.
And that is featured in the RMA Sometimes these prosecutions
aren't actually working within the provisions.
So, and, and so they're rejected,
but the fact they're happening at all is a great shame.
So look, we're really happy
to answer any questions you might have. Yes,
Thank you. So
the actual chair, Tim Costley over to you,
and then we've got a from Andy?
Yes. Sorry, my working,
but I just, if if you see a different response
around different places in the country.
You mentioned NZT being very good at including civil
contractors, but do different
councils handle this differently?
Yeah, I tell my apologies,
I don't recognize you as geo apologies for that.
Um, yeah, look, I, I think so, uh,
because there's an element of personality
and organization involved in this as well.
But consistently though, we do find
that our community is kind of late to the table as part
of the planning and organization process.
If we were at the table much earlier, our view was
that the quality of the response would be enhanced
and our ability to say PR lives
and property would be enhanced as well.
Andy, thank you.
Yeah, look, thank you. Um, very,
very clear what you're asking for.
Just also, um, what role do you see
for civil contractors in, um, uh,
in the preparation before an event?
Um, and I, I'm particularly conscious, you know,
I was on the west coast recently and they,
they were very conscious of how, you know,
who's got which sort of kit around the place.
You know, the mines have got this
and the farmers have got that and so on.
But that kind of list must be really important in the
ability to be able to respond to an event.
But having that planning before obviously helps enormously.
Absolutely. Look, I I, I know a number
of regions offer pre-planning tabletop exercises
and so on to plan in the event as something major happens.
And, uh, our view is we need to be actively engaged in that.
You're absolutely right, Andy.
We have the skill and expertise in how to deal
with infrastructural challenges.
We have the equipment available, we know how
to deploy it at the right time, in the right way.
Uh, and therefore if you are planning something,
it makes absolute sense for us
to be part of that conversation.
And is that patchy across the country at the moment?
Sorry, what was that? Is that
Patchy across the country in terms
of being invited to the table or not?
We're very rarely invited.
Uh, we're often, it's, it's after the fact.
Uh, as I said, uh, you know, in,
in reality our guys will respond as first responders
because it's phrases here,
they feel morally obligated to do that.
So they will go out and start digging people out anyway,
but it's not done within the framework
of the emergency response.
Yeah, no, brilliant. Thank you.
Well, thank you both.
Um, I think Tim's still on,
but I'll thank you on his behalf, um,
because our actual chair's back now.
But thank you for the work you do on the ground.
No, thank you very much. Bye-bye.
Um, folks, I'm not sure Tim's back
on. Tim, are you back on?
I'm, I'm here. But you, you're doing a great job.
You keep going up until the lunch break
and I'll, I'm listening with you.
Okay. Um, we welcome Paul Brown.
Thank you for your patience.
And you have five minutes, uh, for your presentation.
It's Paul here.
Welcome Paul, over to you.
Thank you for your five minute presentation.
Hello? Uh, could you see Oh, my video's off? Okay. Oh,
Carry on.
Okay. You can hear me anyway, so, um, yeah, I,
I've got a really good face for radio, so it's fine.
Um, Kiara, um, my name's, uh, Paul Brown.
Uh, I am, uh, blind, uh, live in Auckland
and I've had a wee bit to do, uh, with climate adaptation
and emergency planning
and really just want to stress the importance
of having the voices of disabled people in emergency,
uh, management and planning.
It's really, uh, important that we, um,
have the resources in the right formats early enough.
And we're, and I am concerned that, uh,
the explanatory notes with the bill
and stuff have, um, you know,
have disabled people down as a group.
But, um, that group is, is, is not specified, is not made
absolutely clear in the bill.
Uh, and suggest it should be also keen that there are some
standards around emergency planning
for disabled people in emergency centers and so on.
You know, you shouldn't be, well, let's be upfront.
You shouldn't be more likely to die in one region or another
because there isn't, uh, a standardization
around agreed standards for things like
emergency centers.
So we're really keen that that's done
and suggest that there's a fund that helps local authorities
to, to, to meet those standards.
So that's it really. Uh, nothing about us without us.
The voice, disabled people needs to be in here.
It needs to be explicit in the bill, not just a suggestion.
That's it. Thanks.
Thanks Paul. Um, committee members, any questions?
No, we just wanted to thank you for your submission, uh,
and your advocacy, Paul, uh, and all the very best to you.
Thank you for your submission. Thanks.
I believe that's US team.
It's now our lunch break
and we are gonna come back at one o'clock.